So far in this chapter, we have viewed probabilities in terms of the frequencies
of random, repeatable events. We shall refer to this as the classical or frequentist
interpretation of probability. Now we turn to the more general Bayesian view, in
which probabilities provide a quantification of uncertainty.
Consider an uncertain event, for example whether the moon was once in its own
orbit around the sun, or whether the Arctic ice cap will have disappeared by the end
of the century. These are not events that can be repeated numerous times in order
to define a notion of probability as we did earlier in the context of boxes of fruit.
Nevertheless, we will generally have some idea, for example, of how quickly we
think the polar ice is melting. If we now obtain fresh evidence, for instance from a
new Earth observation satellite gathering novel forms of diagnostic information, we
may revise our opinion on the rate of ice loss. Our assessment of such matters will
affect the actions we take, for instance the extent to which we endeavour to reduce
the emission of greenhouse gasses. In such circumstances, we would like to be able
to quantify our expression of uncertainty and make precise revisions of uncertainty in
the light of new evidence, as well as subsequently to be able to take optimal actions
or decisions as a consequence. This can all be achieved through the elegant, and very
general, Bayesian interpretation of probability.
The use of probability to represent uncertainty, however, is not an ad-hoc choice,
but is inevitable if we are to respect common sense while making rational coherent
inferences. For instance, Cox (1946) showed that if numerical values are used to
represent degrees of belief, then a simple set of axioms encoding common sense
properties of such beliefs leads uniquely to a set of rules for manipulating degrees of
belief that are equivalent to the sum and product rules of probability. This provided
the first rigorous proof that probability theory could be regarded as an extension of
Boolean logic to situations involving uncertainty (Jaynes, 2003). Numerous other
authors have proposed different sets of properties or axioms that such measures of
uncertainty should satisfy (Ramsey, 1931; Good, 1950; Savage, 1961; deFinetti,
1970; Lindley, 1982). In each case, the resulting numerical quantities behave pre-
cisely according to the rules of probability. It is therefore natural to refer to these
quantities as (Bayesian) probabilities.
In the field of pattern recognition, too, it is helpful to have a more general no-
Thomas Bayes
1701–1761
Thomas Bayes was born in Tun-
bridge Wells and was a clergyman
as well as an amateur scientist and
a mathematician. He studied logic
and theology at Edinburgh Univer-
sity and was elected Fellow of the
Royal Society in 1742. During the 18th century, is-
sues regarding probability arose in connection with
gambling and with the new concept of insurance. One
particularly important problem concerned so-called in-
verse probability. A solution was proposed by Thomas
Bayes in his paper ‘Essay towards solving a problem
in the doctrine of chances’, which was published in
1764, some three years after his death, in the Philo-
sophical Transactions of the Royal Society.
In fact,
Bayes only formulated his theory for the case of a uni-
form prior, and it was Pierre-Simon Laplace who inde-
pendently rediscovered the theory in general form and
who demonstrated its broad applicability.
22
1. INTRODUCTION
tion of probability. Consider the example of polynomial curve fitting discussed in
Section 1.1. It seems reasonable to apply the frequentist notion of probability to the
random values of the observed variables tn. However, we would like to address and
quantify the uncertainty that surrounds the appropriate choice for the model param-
eters w. We shall see that, from a Bayesian perspective, we can use the machinery
of probability theory to describe the uncertainty in model parameters such as w, or
indeed in the choice of model itself.
Bayes’ theorem now acquires a new significance. Recall that in the boxes of fruit
example, the observation of the identity of the fruit provided relevant information
that altered the probability that the chosen box was the red one. In that example,
Bayes’ theorem was used to convert a prior probability into a posterior probability
by incorporating the evidence provided by the observed data. As we shall see in
detail later, we can adopt a similar approach when making inferences about quantities
such as the parameters w in the polynomial curve fitting example. We capture our
assumptions about w, before observing the data, in the form of a prior probability
distribution p(w). The effect of the observed data D = {t1, . . . , tN} is expressed
through the conditional probability p(D|w), and we shall see later, in Section 1.2.5,
how this can be represented explicitly. Bayes’ theorem, which takes the form
p(w|D) = p(D|w)p(w)
p(D)
(1.43)
then allows us to evaluate the uncertainty in w after we have observed D in the form
of the posterior probability p(w|D).
The quantity p(D|w) on the right-hand side of Bayes’ theorem is evaluated for
the observed data set D and can be viewed as a function of the parameter vector
w, in which case it is called the likelihood function. It expresses how probable the
observed data set is for different settings of the parameter vector w. Note that the
likelihood is not a probability distribution over w, and its integral with respect to w
does not (necessarily) equal one.
Given this definition of likelihood, we can state Bayes’ theorem in words
posterior ∝ likelihood × prior
(1.44)
where all of these quantities are viewed as functions of w. The denominator in
(1.43) is the normalization constant, which ensures that the posterior distribution
on the left-hand side is a valid probability density and integrates to one. Indeed,
integrating both sides of (1.43) with respect to w, we can express the denominator
in Bayes’ theorem in terms of the prior distribution and the likelihood function
p(D) =
p(D|w)p(w) dw.
(1.45)
In both the Bayesian and frequentist paradigms, the likelihood function p(D|w)
plays a central role. However, the manner in which it is used is fundamentally dif-
ferent in the two approaches. In a frequentist setting, w is considered to be a fixed
parameter, whose value is determined by some form of ‘estimator’, and error bars
1.2. Probability Theory
23
on this estimate are obtained by considering the distribution of possible data sets D.
By contrast, from the Bayesian viewpoint there is only a single data set D (namely
the one that is actually observed), and the uncertainty in the parameters is expressed
through a probability distribution over w.
A widely used frequentist estimator is maximum likelihood, in which w is set
to the value that maximizes the likelihood function p(D|w). This corresponds to
choosing the value of w for which the probability of the observed data set is maxi-
mized. In the machine learning literature, the negative log of the likelihood function
is called an error function. Because the negative logarithm is a monotonically de-
creasing function, maximizing the likelihood is equivalent to minimizing the error.
One approach to determining frequentist error bars is the bootstrap (Efron, 1979;
Hastie et al., 2001), in which multiple data sets are created as follows. Suppose our
original data set consists of N data points X = {x1, . . . , xN}. We can create a new
data set XB by drawing N points at random from X, with replacement, so that some
points in X may be replicated in XB, whereas other points in X may be absent from
XB. This process can be repeated L times to generate L data sets each of size N and
each obtained by sampling from the original data set X. The statistical accuracy of
parameter estimates can then be evaluated by looking at the variability of predictions
between the different bootstrap data sets.
One advantage of the Bayesian viewpoint is that the inclusion of prior knowl-
edge arises naturally. Suppose, for instance, that a fair-looking coin is tossed three
times and lands heads each time. A classical maximum likelihood estimate of the
probability of landing heads would give 1, implying that all future tosses will land
heads! By contrast, a Bayesian approach with any reasonable prior will lead to a
much less extreme conclusion.
There has been much controversy and debate associated with the relative mer-
its of the frequentist and Bayesian paradigms, which have not been helped by the
fact that there is no unique frequentist, or even Bayesian, viewpoint. For instance,
one common criticism of the Bayesian approach is that the prior distribution is of-
ten selected on the basis of mathematical convenience rather than as a reflection of
any prior beliefs. Even the subjective nature of the conclusions through their de-
pendence on the choice of prior is seen by some as a source of difficulty. Reducing
the dependence on the prior is one motivation for so-called noninformative priors.
However, these lead to difficulties when comparing different models, and indeed
Bayesian methods based on poor choices of prior can give poor results with high
confidence. Frequentist evaluation methods offer some protection from such prob-
lems, and techniques such as cross-validation remain useful in areas such as model
comparison.
This book places a strong emphasis on the Bayesian viewpoint, reflecting the
huge growth in the practical importance of Bayesian methods in the past few years,
while also discussing useful frequentist concepts as required.
Although the Bayesian framework has its origins in the 18th century, the prac-
tical application of Bayesian methods was for a long time severely limited by the
difficulties in carrying through the full Bayesian procedure, particularly the need to
marginalize (sum or integrate) over the whole of parameter space, which, as we shall
Section 2.1
Section 2.4.3
Section 1.3
24
1. INTRODUCTION
see, is required in order to make predictions or to compare different models. The
development of sampling methods, such as Markov chain Monte Carlo (discussed in
Chapter 11) along with dramatic improvements in the speed and memory capacity
of computers, opened the door to the practical use of Bayesian techniques in an im-
pressive range of problem domains. Monte Carlo methods are very flexible and can
be applied to a wide range of models. However, they are computationally intensive
and have mainly been used for small-scale problems.
More recently, highly efficient deterministic approximation schemes such as
variational Bayes and expectation propagation (discussed in Chapter 10) have been
developed. These offer a complementary alternative to sampling methods and have
allowed Bayesian techniques to be used in large-scale applications (Blei et al., 2003).
