For many applications, our objective will be more complex than simply mini-
mizing the number of misclassifications. Let us consider again the medical diagnosis
problem. We note that, if a patient who does not have cancer is incorrectly diagnosed
as having cancer, the consequences may be some patient distress plus the need for
further investigations. Conversely, if a patient with cancer is diagnosed as healthy,
the result may be premature death due to lack of treatment. Thus the consequences
of these two types of mistake can be dramatically different. It would clearly be better
to make fewer mistakes of the second kind, even if this was at the expense of making
more mistakes of the first kind.
We can formalize such issues through the introduction of a loss function, also
called a cost function, which is a single, overall measure of loss incurred in taking
any of the available decisions or actions. Our goal is then to minimize the total loss
incurred. Note that some authors consider instead a utility function, whose value
they aim to maximize. These are equivalent concepts if we take the utility to be
simply the negative of the loss, and throughout this text we shall use the loss function
convention. Suppose that, for a new value of x, the true class is Ck and that we assign
x to class Cj (where j may or may not be equal to k). In so doing, we incur some
level of loss that we denote by Lkj, which we can view as the k, j element of a loss
matrix. For instance, in our cancer example, we might have a loss matrix of the form
shown in Figure 1.25. This particular loss matrix says that there is no loss incurred
if the correct decision is made, there is a loss of 1 if a healthy patient is diagnosed as
having cancer, whereas there is a loss of 1000 if a patient having cancer is diagnosed
as healthy.
The optimal solution is the one which minimizes the loss function. However,
the loss function depends on the true class, which is unknown. For a given input
vector x, our uncertainty in the true class is expressed through the joint probability
distribution p(x,Ck) and so we seek instead to minimize the average loss, where the
average is computed with respect to this distribution, which is given by
E[L] =
k
j
Rj
Lkjp(x,Ck) dx.
(1.80)
Each x can be assigned independently to one of the decision regions Rj. Our goal
is to choose the regions Rj in order to minimize the expected loss (1.80), which
k Lkjp(x,Ck). As before, we can use
implies that for each x we should minimize
the product rule p(x,Ck) = p(Ck|x)p(x) to eliminate the common factor of p(x).
Thus the decision rule that minimizes the expected loss is the one that assigns each
new x to the class j for which the quantity
Inputs
x such that the larger of the two poste-
rior probabilities is less than or equal to
some threshold θ will be rejected.
1.0
42
1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.26 Illustration of the reject option.
p(C1|x)
p(C2|x)
reject region
x
0.0
Lkjp(Ck|x)
k
(1.81)
is a minimum. This is clearly trivial to do, once we know the posterior class proba-
bilities p(Ck|x).
