An important property of the multivariate Gaussian distribution is that if two
sets of variables are jointly Gaussian, then the conditional distribution of one set
conditioned on the other is again Gaussian. Similarly, the marginal distribution of
either set is also Gaussian.
Consider first the case of conditional distributions. Suppose x is a D-dimensional
vector with Gaussian distribution N (x|µ, Σ) and that we partition x into two dis-
joint subsets xa and xb. Without loss of generality, we can take xa to form the first
M components of x, with xb comprising the remaining D − M components, so that
(2.65)
x =
xa
xb
We also define corresponding partitions of the mean vector µ given by
Exercise 2.22
Λaa Λab
Λba Λbb
(2.69)
corresponding to the partitioning (2.65) of the vector x. Because the inverse of a
symmetric matrix is also symmetric, we see that Λaa and Λbb are symmetric, while
ab = Λba. It should be stressed at this point that, for instance, Λaa is not simply
ΛT
given by the inverse of Σaa. In fact, we shall shortly examine the relation between
the inverse of a partitioned matrix and the inverses of its partitions.
Let us begin by finding an expression for the conditional distribution p(xa|xb).
From the product rule of probability, we see that this conditional distribution can be
86
2. PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTIONS
evaluated from the joint distribution p(x) = p(xa, xb) simply by fixing xb to the
observed value and normalizing the resulting expression to obtain a valid probability
distribution over xa.
Instead of performing this normalization explicitly, we can
obtain the solution more efficiently by considering the quadratic form in the exponent
of the Gaussian distribution given by (2.44) and then reinstating the normalization
coefficient at the end of the calculation. If we make use of the partitioning (2.65),
(2.66), and (2.69), we obtain
1
2
(x − µ)TΣ−1(x − µ) =
(xa − µa)TΛaa(xa − µa) −
(xb − µb)TΛba(xa − µa) −
1
2
1
2
1
(xa − µa)TΛab(xb − µb)
2
1
(xb − µb)TΛbb(xb − µb).
2
(2.70)
We see that as a function of xa, this is again a quadratic form, and hence the cor-
responding conditional distribution p(xa|xb) will be Gaussian. Because this distri-
bution is completely characterized by its mean and its covariance, our goal will be
to identify expressions for the mean and covariance of p(xa|xb) by inspection of
(2.70).
This is an example of a rather common operation associated with Gaussian
distributions, sometimes called ‘completing the square’, in which we are given a
quadratic form defining the exponent terms in a Gaussian distribution, and we need
to determine the corresponding mean and covariance. Such problems can be solved
straightforwardly by noting that the exponent in a general Gaussian distribution
N (x|µ, Σ) can be written
xTΣ−1x + xTΣ−1µ + const
(2.71)
1
2
(x − µ)TΣ−1(x − µ) = −
1
2
where ‘const’ denotes terms which are independent of x, and we have made use of
the symmetry of Σ. Thus if we take our general quadratic form and express it in
the form given by the right-hand side of (2.71), then we can immediately equate the
matrix of coefficients entering the second order term in x to the inverse covariance
matrix Σ−1 and the coefficient of the linear term in x to Σ−1µ, from which we can
obtain µ.
Now let us apply this procedure to the conditional Gaussian distribution p(xa|xb)
for which the quadratic form in the exponent is given by (2.70). We will denote the
mean and covariance of this distribution by µa|b and Σa|b, respectively. Consider
the functional dependence of (2.70) on xa in which xb is regarded as a constant. If
we pick out all terms that are second order in xa, we have
1
2
a Λaaxa
xT
(2.72)
from which we can immediately conclude that the covariance (inverse precision) of
p(xa|xb) is given by
(2.73)
Σa|b = Λ−1
aa .
2.3. The Gaussian Distribution
87
(2.74)
(2.75)
Now consider all of the terms in (2.70) that are linear in xa
a {Λaaµa − Λab(xb − µb)}
xT
where we have used ΛT
the coefficient of xa in this expression must equal Σ−1
ba = Λab. From our discussion of the general form (2.71),
a|bµa|b and hence
µa|b = Σa|b {Λaaµa − Λab(xb − µb)}
= µa − Λ−1
aa Λab(xb − µb)
where we have made use of (2.73).
The results (2.73) and (2.75) are expressed in terms of the partitioned precision
matrix of the original joint distribution p(xa, xb). We can also express these results
in terms of the corresponding partitioned covariance matrix. To do this, we make use
of the following identity for the inverse of a partitioned matrix
A B
C D
where we have defined
−1
M
−D−1CM D−1 + D−1CMBD−1
−MBD−1
(2.76)
(2.77)
The quantity M−1 is known as the Schur complement of the matrix on the left-hand
side of (2.76) with respect to the submatrix D. Using the definition
M = (A − BD−1C)−1.
Σaa Σab
Σba Σbb
−1
Λaa Λab
Λba Λbb
and making use of (2.76), we have
Λaa = (Σaa − ΣabΣ−1
Λab = −(Σaa − ΣabΣ−1
bb Σba)−1
bb Σba)−1ΣabΣ−1
bb .
(2.78)
(2.79)
(2.80)
From these we obtain the following expressions for the mean and covariance of the
conditional distribution p(xa|xb)
bb (xb − µb)
bb Σba.
µa|b = µa + ΣabΣ−1
Σa|b = Σaa − ΣabΣ−1
(2.81)
(2.82)
Comparing (2.73) and (2.82), we see that the conditional distribution p(xa|xb) takes
a simpler form when expressed in terms of the partitioned precision matrix than
when it is expressed in terms of the partitioned covariance matrix. Note that the
mean of the conditional distribution p(xa|xb), given by (2.81), is a linear function of
xb and that the covariance, given by (2.82), is independent of xa. This represents an
example of a linear-Gaussian model.
Exercise 2.24
Section 8.1.4
88
2. PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTIONS
