345
case, because they apply to any choice for the distribution p(x, t), so long as both
the training and the test examples are drawn (independently) from the same distribu-
tion, and for any choice for the function f(x) so long as it belongs to F. In real-world
applications of machine learning, we deal with distributions that have significant reg-
ularity, for example in which large regions of input space carry the same class label.
As a consequence of the lack of any assumptions about the form of the distribution,
the PAC bounds are very conservative, in other words they strongly over-estimate
the size of data sets required to achieve a given generalization performance. For this
reason, PAC bounds have found few, if any, practical applications.
One attempt to improve the tightness of the PAC bounds is the PAC-Bayesian
framework (McAllester, 2003), which considers a distribution over the space F of
functions, somewhat analogous to the prior in a Bayesian treatment. This still con-
siders any possible choice for p(x, t), and so although the bounds are tighter, they
are still very conservative.
7.2. Relevance Vector Machines
Support vector machines have been used in a variety of classification and regres-
sion applications. Nevertheless, they suffer from a number of limitations, several
of which have been highlighted already in this chapter. In particular, the outputs of
an SVM represent decisions rather than posterior probabilities. Also, the SVM was
originally formulated for two classes, and the extension to K > 2 classes is prob-
lematic. There is a complexity parameter C, or ν (as well as a parameter 	 in the case
of regression), that must be found using a hold-out method such as cross-validation.
Finally, predictions are expressed as linear combinations of kernel functions that are
centred on training data points and that are required to be positive definite.
The relevance vector machine or RVM (Tipping, 2001) is a Bayesian sparse ker-
nel technique for regression and classification that shares many of the characteristics
of the SVM whilst avoiding its principal limitations. Additionally, it typically leads
to much sparser models resulting in correspondingly faster performance on test data
whilst maintaining comparable generalization error.
In contrast to the SVM we shall find it more convenient to introduce the regres-
sion form of the RVM first and then consider the extension to classification tasks.
