In order to motivate the use of directed graphs to describe probability distributions,
consider first an arbitrary joint distribution p(a, b, c) over three variables a, b, and c.
Note that at this stage, we do not need to specify anything further about these vari-
ables, such as whether they are discrete or continuous. Indeed, one of the powerful
aspects of graphical models is that a specific graph can make probabilistic statements
for a broad class of distributions. By application of the product rule of probability
(1.11), we can write the joint distribution in the form
p(a, b, c) = p(c|a, b)p(a, b).
(8.1)
A second application of the product rule, this time to the second term on the right-
hand side of (8.1), gives
p(a, b, c) = p(c|a, b)p(b|a)p(a).
(8.2)
Note that this decomposition holds for any choice of the joint distribution. We now
represent the right-hand side of (8.2) in terms of a simple graphical model as follows.
First we introduce a node for each of the random variables a, b, and c and associate
each node with the corresponding conditional distribution on the right-hand side of
Figure 8.1 A directed graphical model representing the joint probabil-
ity distribution over three variables a, b, and c, correspond-
ing to the decomposition on the right-hand side of (8.2).
a
b
8.1. Bayesian Networks
361
c
(8.2). Then, for each conditional distribution we add directed links (arrows) to the
graph from the nodes corresponding to the variables on which the distribution is
conditioned. Thus for the factor p(c|a, b), there will be links from nodes a and b to
node c, whereas for the factor p(a) there will be no incoming links. The result is the
graph shown in Figure 8.1. If there is a link going from a node a to a node b, then we
say that node a is the parent of node b, and we say that node b is the child of node a.
Note that we shall not make any formal distinction between a node and the variable
to which it corresponds but will simply use the same symbol to refer to both.
An interesting point to note about (8.2) is that the left-hand side is symmetrical
with respect to the three variables a, b, and c, whereas the right-hand side is not.
Indeed, in making the decomposition in (8.2), we have implicitly chosen a particular
ordering, namely a, b, c, and had we chosen a different ordering we would have
obtained a different decomposition and hence a different graphical representation.
We shall return to this point later.
For the moment let us extend the example of Figure 8.1 by considering the joint
distribution over K variables given by p(x1, . . . , xK). By repeated application of
the product rule of probability, this joint distribution can be written as a product of
conditional distributions, one for each of the variables
p(x1, . . . , xK) = p(xK|x1, . . . , xK−1) . . . p(x2|x1)p(x1).
(8.3)
For a given choice of K, we can again represent this as a directed graph having K
nodes, one for each conditional distribution on the right-hand side of (8.3), with each
node having incoming links from all lower numbered nodes. We say that this graph
is fully connected because there is a link between every pair of nodes.
So far, we have worked with completely general joint distributions, so that the
decompositions, and their representations as fully connected graphs, will be applica-
ble to any choice of distribution. As we shall see shortly, it is the absence of links
in the graph that conveys interesting information about the properties of the class of
distributions that the graph represents. Consider the graph shown in Figure 8.2. This
is not a fully connected graph because, for instance, there is no link from x1 to x2 or
from x3 to x7.
We shall now go from this graph to the corresponding representation of the joint
probability distribution written in terms of the product of a set of conditional dis-
tributions, one for each node in the graph. Each such conditional distribution will
be conditioned only on the parents of the corresponding node in the graph. For in-
stance, x5 will be conditioned on x1 and x3. The joint distribution of all 7 variables
K
is therefore given by
p(x1)p(x2)p(x3)p(x4|x1, x2, x3)p(x5|x1, x3)p(x6|x4)p(x7|x4, x5).
(8.4)
The reader should take a moment to study carefully the correspondence between
(8.4) and Figure 8.2.
We can now state in general terms the relationship between a given directed
graph and the corresponding distribution over the variables. The joint distribution
defined by a graph is given by the product, over all of the nodes of the graph, of
a conditional distribution for each node conditioned on the variables corresponding
to the parents of that node in the graph. Thus, for a graph with K nodes, the joint
distribution is given by
362
8. GRAPHICAL MODELS
Figure 8.2 Example of a directed acyclic graph describing the joint
distribution over variables x1, . . . , x7. The corresponding
decomposition of the joint distribution is given by (8.4).
x1
x2
x4
x3
x5
x6
x7
Exercise 8.1
Exercise 8.2
p(x) =
p(xk|pak)
k=1
(8.5)
where pak denotes the set of parents of xk, and x = {x1, . . . , xK}. This key
equation expresses the factorization properties of the joint distribution for a directed
graphical model. Although we have considered each node to correspond to a single
variable, we can equally well associate sets of variables and vector-valued variables
with the nodes of a graph. It is easy to show that the representation on the right-
hand side of (8.5) is always correctly normalized provided the individual conditional
distributions are normalized.
The directed graphs that we are considering are subject to an important restric-
tion namely that there must be no directed cycles, in other words there are no closed
paths within the graph such that we can move from node to node along links follow-
ing the direction of the arrows and end up back at the starting node. Such graphs are
also called directed acyclic graphs, or DAGs. This is equivalent to the statement that
there exists an ordering of the nodes such that there are no links that go from any
node to any lower numbered node.
