In the case of directed graphs, we saw that it was possible to test whether a par-
ticular conditional independence property holds by applying a graphical test called
d-separation. This involved testing whether or not the paths connecting two sets of
nodes were ‘blocked’. The definition of blocked, however, was somewhat subtle
due to the presence of paths having head-to-head nodes. We might ask whether it
is possible to define an alternative graphical semantics for probability distributions
such that conditional independence is determined by simple graph separation. This
is indeed the case and corresponds to undirected graphical models. By removing the
Section 8.2
384
8. GRAPHICAL MODELS
Figure 8.27 An example of an undirected graph in
which every path from any node in set
A to any node in set B passes through
at least one node in set C. Conse-
quently the conditional
independence
property A ⊥⊥ B | C holds for any
probability distribution described by this
graph.
C
B
A
directionality from the links of the graph, the asymmetry between parent and child
nodes is removed, and so the subtleties associated with head-to-head nodes no longer
arise.
Suppose that in an undirected graph we identify three sets of nodes, denoted A,
B, and C, and that we consider the conditional independence property
A ⊥⊥ B | C.
(8.37)
To test whether this property is satisfied by a probability distribution defined by a
graph we consider all possible paths that connect nodes in set A to nodes in set
B. If all such paths pass through one or more nodes in set C, then all such paths are
‘blocked’ and so the conditional independence property holds. However, if there is at
least one such path that is not blocked, then the property does not necessarily hold, or
more precisely there will exist at least some distributions corresponding to the graph
that do not satisfy this conditional independence relation. This is illustrated with an
example in Figure 8.27. Note that this is exactly the same as the d-separation crite-
rion except that there is no ‘explaining away’ phenomenon. Testing for conditional
independence in undirected graphs is therefore simpler than in directed graphs.
An alternative way to view the conditional independence test is to imagine re-
moving all nodes in set C from the graph together with any links that connect to
those nodes. We then ask if there exists a path that connects any node in A to any
node in B. If there are no such paths, then the conditional independence property
must hold.
The Markov blanket for an undirected graph takes a particularly simple form,
because a node will be conditionally independent of all other nodes conditioned only
on the neighbouring nodes, as illustrated in Figure 8.28.
